So this is a very simplified
button which has two variations.
With this demo I want show you
how custom properties allow us
to create multiple variations
of components really easily and
probably the most basic
component ever is a button.
So here we have this flat
button with a color variation.
The HTML looks like this.
And here we have the CSS
that sets the actual colors.
I've omitted the CSS that sets padding and
margins and
stuff because that's not that relevant.
So look at how this works,
for the variation we have,
we need to repeat the actual
color multiple times.
So, how could we simplify
this with custom properties?
You could probably guess at this point we
would be setting a color variable with
the actual color and using it, And
we will use it here as well and here.
And this means that our variation
can just set a color variable and
we can omit everything else,
it just works the same.
Notice however that I did what
I said you should not do.
I included the value for
my custom property in my base rule,
which means that everybody that wants
to style my component now needs
to override the specificity of this rule.
This is not too bad in this specific case
because the selector is just a button.
But in a real website,
this would not just be a button element,
it would probably have classes and
all sorts of things.
So overriding it's specificity
might end up being quite involved.
So in general,
we should avoid this practice and
we should not be setting values here.
So what can we do?
We can use the fullback parameter and
specify a fullback here.
And here.
And I missed the closing parenthesis.
Well, that broke really badly was
just the closing parenthesis.
And now this works the same, but
there is a bit of a problem.
We've repeated this fall
back multiple times.
So that's not ideal.
We don't like repetition.
Repetition means that every time you
need to make a change to your CSS,
you have to change it multiple times.
It's much more likely to get out of sync.
It means you could end up with
broken code later down the line.
There is this rule in software
engineering called DRY which stands for
don't repeat yourself.
Basically, you should avoid
repetition as much as possible.
There's a new revision of this rule that
says it's okay to write some things twice.
But in general, try to avoid repetition.
And I mean this is what variables
are great for, avoiding repetition.
So what can we do?
We can set the initial value.
On a variable.
And this is fine to define in the actual
rule because we don't actually
expect people styling our components
to change the initial value.
So we can do this.
And everywhere where we have black.
We can do that.
And this works, but
it's kind of verbose, isn't it?
So what else can we do?
So instead of specifying a variable for
the initial value,
we can actually have a separate,
hidden variable of sorts for
our actual color that we
use in our component.
And that variable will be set to
whatever the color variable is.
Whoops.
Plus a fall back.
So that variable will always have a value.
And therefore we can use
it without a fallback
So our code can just use this
underscore color variable instead
of this huge long string.
And as you can see, this works just fine.
And of course,
as we've seen you could always do this.
You could register your color property.
You could register it as a color,
we do want it to inherit and
the initial value would be black.
And then we can just
use the color variable.
No need for any fake private variable,
it works just fine.
But as we've seen the problem
with that is browser support.
There is also another problem that you
might want to specify different fallbacks
for the same property per rule, and
once you register it, that's it.
It's registered for your entire CSS.
It's registered globally.
It's registered with the same
initial value everywhere.
In some cases, you might not want that.
But in most cases,
this is the superior solution.
And it's just that browser support
doesn't allow us to use it yet.
So let's go back to the previous one.
Oops here we want this and here.
All right and this works fine.
So to recap there are three fallback
strategies for dry fallbacks.
The first one is to have
the fallback in a variable.
This is very verbose, but
in some cases it might make sense.
It does have the benefit
that if someone really wants
to override the default itself,
they can do it.
The second one is to use
pseudo private properties.
While this might look horrible
remember that until now we only for
example in JavaScript, we got private
properties very, very recently.
Until like a year ago,
using underscore prefixed properties in
JavaScript was the only way
to have private variables.
So there is a lot of precedent on the web
platform for this kind of pattern.
So the second solution is to use pseudo
private properties that already have
a fallback so they always have a value and
we can use them without a fallback.
And the third one is to use that property,
which is in most cases ideal but
not supported everywhere yet.
So, another huge benefit of using
custom properties is encapsulation.
People styling our component can
style it with the custom property
without actually knowing how
we've structured our CSS.
Without knowing how we've achieved
the values effects we've achieved.
They only know what we have exposed
through this styling API of sorts.
Let's look at an example.
So here you see that when we hover
over these this flat button,
the color changes abruptly, there is
no transition, there is no effect.
So what if we wanted to instead have
a transition where the border just
grows inwards until it
fills out entire button.
How can we do that with
a background you ask?
We can't, we would need to use a different
technique to draw the background which is
not an actual background.
What we would have to do is use
a box-shadow instead with no offsets,
no blur and just.
A large spread and
it would be the same as this color and
it would begin set cuz we want it
to be drawn inside the element.
And we would not have a background.
Notice that now it works the same, even
though it's actually now a book shadow.
It looks identical, but
we can actually animate the book shadow.
See that.
So what's the takeaway here?
Even though we've used this
horrible hack to style
a component the way we wanted,
nobody using our component and
styling our component
needs to know about it.
If in the future, we get some crazy CSS
way to be able to animate backgrounds
that way,
we can just get rid of this hack.
We can use a regular background and nobody
needs to change their code giving styling
our component with different colors.
So I think this is probably one
of the most important takeaways.
That CSS variables enable theming
that is independent of CSS structure.
And this doesn't necessarily
just apply to components.
A good practice is to structure
your CSS in a modular way so
that different parts of your
CSS can be independent.
And this means that these different
parts don't need to know about all
the other parts.
>> What happens if you define the property
syntax as color but you set a number or
something else?
>> Then I believe the entire app property
rule is invalid and it gets ignored.
And this is exactly the type of thing
where it's really difficult to debug
the CSS code and it's better if
your property rule is not working,
It's better to go to the console and do
the same thing through the JavaScript API,
the CSS register property API that we saw.
Because then you get actual feedback,
you get actual errors that
help you debug whereas with the property
rule you just sit there and
look at your code and
wonder what did you mess up.
And another thing also for
these initial values,
is they cannot depend on variables.
They need to be independent.
They cannot be relative values.
They cannot depend on other variables.
The initial values you specify need to be,
the browser needs to
be able to resolve them without
looking at other elements basically.
Just like the built in initial values,
just like the initial values
that other properties have.
>> Is it practical to store gradient
background color stops with variables
along with the gradient direction?
>> Yeah, in fact that actually makes it
much easier to animate the gradients.
As we'll see in the transitions
in animation section.
This is like a primary use case for
registering custom properties, being able
to store like parts of gradients so
that you can animate them individually.